docs/cli/index.md, before:

# `hk`

**Usage**: `hk [FLAGS] <SUBCOMMAND>`

**Version**: 1.1.2

- **Usage**: `hk [FLAGS] <SUBCOMMAND>`

## Global Flags

### `-j --jobs <JOBS>`

Number of jobs to run in parallel

### `-p --profile… <PROFILE>`

Profiles to enable/disable prefix with ! to disable e.g. --profile slow --profile !fast

### `-s --slow`

Shorthand for --profile=slow

### `-v --verbose…`

Enables verbose output

### `-q --quiet`

Suppresses output

### `--silent`

Suppresses all output

## Subcommands

- [`hk builtins`](/cli/builtins.md)
- [`hk cache clear`](/cli/cache/clear.md)
- [`hk check [FLAGS] [FILES]…`](/cli/check.md)
- [`hk completion <SHELL>`](/cli/completion.md)
- [`hk config`](/cli/config.md)
- [`hk fix [FLAGS] [FILES]…`](/cli/fix.md)
- [`hk init [-f --force] [--mise]`](/cli/init.md)
- [`hk install [--mise]`](/cli/install.md)
- [`hk run [FLAGS] [FILES]… <SUBCOMMAND>`](/cli/run.md)
- [`hk run commit-msg [FLAGS] <COMMIT_MSG_FILE> [FILES]…`](/cli/run/commit-msg.md)
- [`hk run pre-commit [FLAGS] [FILES]…`](/cli/run/pre-commit.md)
- [`hk run pre-push [FLAGS] [ARGS]…`](/cli/run/pre-push.md)
- [`hk run prepare-commit-msg [FLAGS] <ARGS>…`](/cli/run/prepare-commit-msg.md)
- [`hk uninstall`](/cli/uninstall.md)
- [`hk validate`](/cli/validate.md)
- [`hk version`](/cli/version.md)

Commit message:

feat: Add support for .hkrc.pkl user configuration file (#117)
This PR adds support for an optional .hkrc.pkl file that allows users to
set default configuration values and environment variables that apply
across all projects.

## Features
- Global defaults: Set default values for command-line flags like
--jobs, --profile, --all, etc.
- Global environment variables: Define environment variables that are
available to all hooks
- Per-hook configuration: Override settings for specific hooks (e.g.,
different environment variables for pre-commit vs pre-push)
- Per-step configuration: Fine-grained control over individual steps
with support for:
  - Custom environment variables
  - Glob pattern overrides
  - Exclude pattern overrides
  - Profile settings

## Usage
Create a .hkrc.pkl file in your project directory:

```
amends "package://github.com/jdx/hk/releases/download/v1.1.2/hk@1.1.2#/UserConfig.pkl"

// Global environment variables
environment {
  ["GLOBAL_VAR"] = "global_value"
}

// Global defaults
defaults {
  jobs = 4
  profiles = ["slow"]
}

// Per-hook configuration
hooks {
  ["pre-commit"] {
    environment {
      ["HOOK_VAR"] = "pre-commit-value"
    }
    steps {
      ["prettier"] {
        glob = "*.{js,ts,json}"
        environment {
          ["PRETTIER_CONFIG"] = "custom-config.json"
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

## CLI Integration
- Use --hkrc <path> to optionally specify a custom user config file
location
  - Defaults to the project's toplevel .hkrc.pkl if no path is specified

## Implementation Details
- Follows existing patterns in the codebase for configuration loading
and parsing
- Supports existing configuration formats through pkl evaluation
- Added tests in `test/hkrc.bats`
- Maintains backward compatibility - feature is entirely optional

---------

Co-authored-by: jdx <216188+jdx@users.noreply.github.com>

docs/cli/index.md, after:

# `hk`

**Usage**: `hk [FLAGS] <SUBCOMMAND>`

**Version**: 1.1.2

- **Usage**: `hk [FLAGS] <SUBCOMMAND>`

## Global Flags

### `--hkrc <PATH>`

Override the default path for the global configuration file.

### `-j --jobs <JOBS>`

Number of jobs to run in parallel

### `-p --profile… <PROFILE>`

Profiles to enable/disable prefix with ! to disable e.g. --profile slow --profile !fast

### `-s --slow`

Shorthand for --profile=slow

### `-v --verbose…`

Enables verbose output

### `-q --quiet`

Suppresses output

### `--silent`

Suppresses all output

## Subcommands

- [`hk builtins`](/cli/builtins.md)
- [`hk cache clear`](/cli/cache/clear.md)
- [`hk check [FLAGS] [FILES]…`](/cli/check.md)
- [`hk completion <SHELL>`](/cli/completion.md)
- [`hk config`](/cli/config.md)
- [`hk fix [FLAGS] [FILES]…`](/cli/fix.md)
- [`hk init [-f --force] [--mise]`](/cli/init.md)
- [`hk install [--mise]`](/cli/install.md)
- [`hk run [FLAGS] [FILES]… <SUBCOMMAND>`](/cli/run.md)
- [`hk run commit-msg [FLAGS] <COMMIT_MSG_FILE> [FILES]…`](/cli/run/commit-msg.md)
- [`hk run pre-commit [FLAGS] [FILES]…`](/cli/run/pre-commit.md)
- [`hk run pre-push [FLAGS] [ARGS]…`](/cli/run/pre-push.md)
- [`hk run prepare-commit-msg [FLAGS] <ARGS>…`](/cli/run/prepare-commit-msg.md)
- [`hk uninstall`](/cli/uninstall.md)
- [`hk validate`](/cli/validate.md)
- [`hk version`](/cli/version.md)
