docs/getting_started.md, before:

# Getting Started

A tool for running hooks on files in a git repository.

## Installation

Use [mise-en-place](https://github.com/jdx/mise) to install hk (you'll also need the `pkl` cli):

```sh
mise use hk pkl
hk --version
```

:::tip
mise-en-place integrates well with hk. Features common in similar git-hook managers like dependency management, task dependencies, and env vars can be provided by mise.

See [mise integration](/mise_integration) for more information.
:::

Or install from source with `cargo`:

```sh
cargo install hk
```

Other installation methods:

- [`brew install hk`](https://formulae.brew.sh/formula/hk)
- [`aqua g -i jdx/hk`](https://github.com/aquaproj/aqua-registry/blob/main/pkgs/jdx/hk/registry.yaml)

## Project Setup

Use [`hk init`](/cli/init) to generate a `hk.pkl` file:

```sh
hk init
```

## `hk.pkl`

This will generate a `hk.pkl` file in the root of the repository, here's an example `hk.pkl` with eslint and prettier linters:

```pkl
amends "package://github.com/jdx/hk/releases/download/v1.1.2/hk@1.1.2#/Config.pkl"
import "package://github.com/jdx/hk/releases/download/v1.1.2/hk@1.1.2#/Builtins.pkl"

local linters = new Mapping<String, Step> {
    // linters can be manually defined
    ["eslint"] {
        // the files to run the linter on, if no files are matched, the linter will be skipped
        // this will filter the staged files and return the subset matching these globs
        glob = List("*.js"; "*.ts")
        // a command that returns non-zero to fail the check
        check = "eslint {{files}}"
    }
    // linters can also be specified with the builtins pkl library
    ["prettier"] = Builtins.prettier
    // with pkl, builtins can also be extended:
    ["prettier-yaml"] = (Builtins.prettier) {
        glob = List("*.yaml"; "*.yml")
    }
}

hooks {
    ["pre-commit"] {
        fix = true           // runs the "fix" step of linters to modify files
        stash = "git" // stashes unstaged changes when running fix steps
        steps {
            ["prelint"] {
                check = "mise run prelint"
                exclusive = true // blocks other steps from starting until this one finishes
            }
            ...linters
            ["postlint"] {
                check = "mise run postlint"
                exclusive = true
            }
        }
    }
}
```

See [configuration](/configuration) for more information on the `hk.pkl` file.

## Usage

Inside a git repository with a `hk.pkl` file, run [`hk install`](/cli/install) to configure git to use the hooks defined in `hk.pkl`:

```sh
hk install
```

This will install the hooks for the repository like `pre-commit` and `pre-push` if they are defined in `hk.pkl`. Running `git commit` would now run the linters defined above in our example through the pre-commit hook.

## Checking and Fixing Code

You can check or fix code with [`hk check`](/cli/check) or [`hk fix`](/cli/fix)—by convention, "check" means files should not be modified and "fix"
should verify everything "check" does but also modify files to fix any issues. By default, `hk check|fix` run against any modified files in the repo.

:::tip
Use `hk check --all` in CI to lint all the files in the repo or `hk check --from-ref main` to lint files that have changed since the `main` branch.
:::

## Running Hooks

To explicitly run a hook without going through git, use the [`hk run`](/cli/run) command. This is generally useful for testing hooks locally.

```sh
hk run pre-commit
```

Commit message:

feat: Add support for .hkrc.pkl user configuration file (#117)
This PR adds support for an optional .hkrc.pkl file that allows users to
set default configuration values and environment variables that apply
across all projects.

## Features
- Global defaults: Set default values for command-line flags like
--jobs, --profile, --all, etc.
- Global environment variables: Define environment variables that are
available to all hooks
- Per-hook configuration: Override settings for specific hooks (e.g.,
different environment variables for pre-commit vs pre-push)
- Per-step configuration: Fine-grained control over individual steps
with support for:
  - Custom environment variables
  - Glob pattern overrides
  - Exclude pattern overrides
  - Profile settings

## Usage
Create a .hkrc.pkl file in your project directory:

```
amends "package://github.com/jdx/hk/releases/download/v1.1.2/hk@1.1.2#/UserConfig.pkl"

// Global environment variables
environment {
  ["GLOBAL_VAR"] = "global_value"
}

// Global defaults
defaults {
  jobs = 4
  profiles = ["slow"]
}

// Per-hook configuration
hooks {
  ["pre-commit"] {
    environment {
      ["HOOK_VAR"] = "pre-commit-value"
    }
    steps {
      ["prettier"] {
        glob = "*.{js,ts,json}"
        environment {
          ["PRETTIER_CONFIG"] = "custom-config.json"
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

## CLI Integration
- Use --hkrc <path> to optionally specify a custom user config file
location
  - Defaults to the project's toplevel .hkrc.pkl if no path is specified

## Implementation Details
- Follows existing patterns in the codebase for configuration loading
and parsing
- Supports existing configuration formats through pkl evaluation
- Added tests in `test/hkrc.bats`
- Maintains backward compatibility - feature is entirely optional

---------

Co-authored-by: jdx <216188+jdx@users.noreply.github.com>

docs/getting_started.md, after:

# Getting Started

A tool for running hooks on files in a git repository.

## Installation

Use [mise-en-place](https://github.com/jdx/mise) to install hk (you'll also need the `pkl` cli):

```sh
mise use hk pkl
hk --version
```

:::tip
mise-en-place integrates well with hk. Features common in similar git-hook managers like dependency management, task dependencies, and env vars can be provided by mise.

See [mise integration](/mise_integration) for more information.
:::

Or install from source with `cargo`:

```sh
cargo install hk
```

Other installation methods:

- [`brew install hk`](https://formulae.brew.sh/formula/hk)
- [`aqua g -i jdx/hk`](https://github.com/aquaproj/aqua-registry/blob/main/pkgs/jdx/hk/registry.yaml)

## Project Setup

Use [`hk init`](/cli/init) to generate a `hk.pkl` file:

```sh
hk init
```

## Global Configuration

You can create a global configuration file that will be applied to all projects. This is useful for setting up consistent linting rules across multiple repositories. By default, hk will look for this file in your home directory.

The global configuration file follows the same format as `hk.pkl` and can be used to define global hooks and linters. Project-specific settings in `hk.pkl` can override or extend the global configuration.

## `hk.pkl`

This will generate a `hk.pkl` file in the root of the repository, here's an example `hk.pkl` with eslint and prettier linters:

```pkl
amends "package://github.com/jdx/hk/releases/download/v1.1.2/hk@1.1.2#/Config.pkl"
import "package://github.com/jdx/hk/releases/download/v1.1.2/hk@1.1.2#/Builtins.pkl"

local linters = new Mapping<String, Step> {
    // linters can be manually defined
    ["eslint"] {
        // the files to run the linter on, if no files are matched, the linter will be skipped
        // this will filter the staged files and return the subset matching these globs
        glob = List("*.js"; "*.ts")
        // a command that returns non-zero to fail the check
        check = "eslint {{files}}"
    }
    // linters can also be specified with the builtins pkl library
    ["prettier"] = Builtins.prettier
    // with pkl, builtins can also be extended:
    ["prettier-yaml"] = (Builtins.prettier) {
        glob = List("*.yaml"; "*.yml")
    }
}

hooks {
    ["pre-commit"] {
        fix = true           // runs the "fix" step of linters to modify files
        stash = "git" // stashes unstaged changes when running fix steps
        steps {
            ["prelint"] {
                check = "mise run prelint"
                exclusive = true // blocks other steps from starting until this one finishes
            }
            ...linters
            ["postlint"] {
                check = "mise run postlint"
                exclusive = true
            }
        }
    }
}
```

See [configuration](/configuration) for more information on the `hk.pkl` file.

## Usage

Inside a git repository with a `hk.pkl` file, run [`hk install`](/cli/install) to configure git to use the hooks defined in `hk.pkl`:

```sh
hk install
```

This will install the hooks for the repository like `pre-commit` and `pre-push` if they are defined in `hk.pkl`. Running `git commit` would now run the linters defined above in our example through the pre-commit hook.

## Checking and Fixing Code

You can check or fix code with [`hk check`](/cli/check) or [`hk fix`](/cli/fix)—by convention, "check" means files should not be modified and "fix"
should verify everything "check" does but also modify files to fix any issues. By default, `hk check|fix` run against any modified files in the repo.

:::tip
Use `hk check --all` in CI to lint all the files in the repo or `hk check --from-ref main` to lint files that have changed since the `main` branch.
:::

## Running Hooks

To explicitly run a hook without going through git, use the [`hk run`](/cli/run) command. This is generally useful for testing hooks locally.

```sh
hk run pre-commit
```
